# About

The field of ancient DNA (aDNA) witnessed an exponential growth in the last decade, with an increase in both the number of analysed samples and the quality of the genomic data generated from skeletal remains. This was mostly due to the development of highly sensitive wet-lab methods, development of more affordable sequencing technologies, and computational tools stemming from advances in molecular genetics, biochemistry, and bioinformatics, thus highlighting the interdisciplinary nature of the field. As of March 2024, there is human aDNA data available for more than 10,000 individuals worldwide. With better understanding of DNA preservation in skeletal remains and as sampling sizes grow this opens the possibility to address a wide range of biological questions and explore multidisciplinary approaches using human aDNA to address open questions on the ecology and health of past human populations 

The first day will be dedicated to introduction to working with human archaeological remains (including a session and round table on ethics) and the main challenges and features of aDNA sequencing data processing. The students will work on real (published) datasets, from raw sequencing reads to genotypes. The second day will focus on analysis of genetic relatedness, essential as a data curation step, but also a crucial analysis bridging genetics and archaeology. The third and last day will cover how to integrate new and previously published data, curation of large aDNA datasets, and how to perform analysis of ancestry using different methods. At the end of each day we will host a round table, where attendees will have the opportunity to ask specific questions about their own datasets or to discuss any topics in more detail. The practical sessions will be supported by a team of teaching assistants (TA’s), who will be available to help students solve any issues they might encounter.  By the end of the Summer School, students will have an understanding of how to effectively carry out the major bioinformatic steps of human aDNA analysis, from sequencing data to population analyses.

